A list of some of the greatest ever western philosophers in more or less chronological order. Some of these are even greater than the others though; these have their names in caps to distinguish them. I've tried to include the title of their most important work/works if I know it. Hopefully this will give those of you new to philosophy some place to start. Again, I hope to enlarge this page with more information over time.

Thales: Traditionally considered the first ever western philosopher. None of his writings survive.

SOCRATES: Ancient Greek, changed philosophy from a study of natural science to ethics and politics. Wrote nothing.

PLATO: Ancient Greek, student of Socrates, most influential philosopher of all time. Works: The Republic.

ARISTOTLE: Ancient Greek, student of Plato, second most influential philosopher of all time. Works: The Nichomachean Ethics, The Metaphysics, The Politics.

Plotinus: Fused Platonic principles with Christian teaching. The last of the ancient Greek philosophers. Works: The Enneads.

St Augustine: Continued Plotinus' project of Platonic Christianity. The first of the Scholastic philosophers. Works: The Confessions, The City of God.

St Anselm: Scholastic, mostly famous for his argument for the existence of God, the Ontological Argument, which was based on the argument that it would be contradictory to God's nature for him not to exist. Works: The Monologion.

ST AQUINAS: The greatest Scholastic, he changed their emphasis from Plato to Aristotle, promoting him as the greatest of all philosophers and attempting to fuse Aristotelianism and Christianity. Works: The Summa Theologica.

Duns Scotus: Scholastic. I don't know much about him.

William of Ockham: Scholastic. Mostly famous for Ockham's razor, which argues for simplicity in arguments.

Machiavelli: Political philosopher, famous for the ruthless advice he gave to rulers in The Prince. Works: The Prince, The Discourses.

DESCARTES: The father of modern philosophy for challenging the blind acceptance of Aristotle. Works: The Meditations, Discourse on Method.

HOBBES: Political philosopher. Explosively infamous in his day for being a suspected atheist, among other reasons. Works: Leviathan.

SPINOZA: As infamous as Hobbes, his contemporary, in his day. Thought that the universe was God and we were all part of it. Works: Ethics.

Malebranche: Considered the equal of Descartes or Spinoza in his day, now mostly ignored. Works: The Search After Truth.

Arnauld: Equal to Leibniz and Malebranche in his day, now suffers the same fate as Malebranche. Works: His correspondance is highly important, but also Logic or the Art of Thinking.

LOCKE: Empiricist. Famous for his views on the human mind, knowledge and how we can own property. Currently my favourite philosopher. Works: An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Two Treatises of Government.

LEIBNIZ: Rationalist, famous for his justification of evil and his ideas on substance. Works: Discourse on Metaphysics, Monadology, Theodicy.

BERKELEY: Idealist, argued that the physical didn't really exist, only the mental did. Not a popular view nowadays. Works: A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous.

HUME: Empiricist, most famous for arguing that inductive knowledge is not certain. Works: A Treatise on Human Nature, The Enquiries.

Rousseau: Political philosopher mostly. Some consider him great, others, like me, think him a sloppy and shallow thinker. Works: The Social Contract, The Origins of Social Inequality, Emile.

KANT: Considered to be the greatest of the modern philosophers, his influence is all-pervasive in almost every area of philosophy. Works: Critique of Pure Reason, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.

Fichte: Follower of Kant, one of the founders of nationalism.

HEGEL: Argued that all history was progressing towards a perfect state of being. Works: Phenomenology of Spirit, The Philosophy of Right.

