Notes on Kant's ProlegomenaNotes on Kant's
  Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics
  in 44 Points
  Contact: Dr. Jan Garrett
  Last modified March 28, 2004
  These notes refer to the translation of Kant's Prolegomena found in the Modern 
  Philosophy anthology edited by Watkins and Ariew and published by Hackett 
  Publishing Company in 1998. 
  1. Kant is interested in whether metaphysics, as a science consisting of 
  synthetic a priori propositions, is at all possible. (Marginal page number 
  255) 
  2. Metaphysics would concern topics such as causality, substance, the universe 
  as a whole, free will, the immortal soul, and God. 
  3. It is not expressed in analytic a priori judgments, or judgments whose 
  predicate is contained in their subject and which can be discovered without 
  the use of concrete experience. (266) 
  4. It is not expressed in synthetic a posteriori judgments, or judgments whose 
  predicate adds something to the subject and which are only discovered through 
  concrete experience. (266) 
  5. In Kant's view, Hume decisively showed that we have neither synthetic a 
  posteriori (empirical) nor analytic a priori knowledge of causation. (257) 
  6. Kant asserts that pure mathematics is an example of synthetic a priori 
  knowledge. Mathematical knowledge can proceed only by construction of 
  concepts, in a mentally purified field of space and/or time. With the 
  geometrical proposition "the whole is greater than its part," the predicate is 
  necessarily joined to the subject and the mind brings in a purified intuition 
  of space. (283-286) 
  7. Kant's transcendental philosophy (at one point called 'critical idealism') 
  is nothing but the complete solution to the problem regarding the possibility 
  of synthetic a priori propositions. 
  8. A human being's "intuition" can anticipate the actuality of a [sensible] 
  object, because it supplies "the form of sensibility, which in me as subject 
  precedes all the actual impressions through which I am affected by objects." 
  (282) 
  9. The forms of sensuous intuition do not enable us to know things [as they 
  are] in themselves; we know things only as they appear to us, as phenomena 
  (283) 
  10. Geometry is based upon the form of intuition we call space and arithmetic 
  is based upon the form of intuition we call time. (283) 
  11. The faculty of a priori intuition contain only the form of phenomena, not 
  their matter or sensuous content. (284) 
  12. Some judgments rest directly on the a priori forms of intuition: that 
  (complete) space has three dimensions; that a straight line can be drawn to 
  infinity (284-85) 
  13. Kant notes that righthand and lefthand gloves, each the mirror of the 
  other, are incongruent but indistinguishable except in terms of right and 
  left, which are spatially relative to perceivers. He takes this as proof that 
  space and time are not aspects of things in themselves. (285-86) 
  14. Propositions of geometry are not descriptions of things in themselves; nor 
  is space "out there." It is in us and discovered there a priori; we all 
  constitute it in the same way; for this reason we all are able to arrive at 
  the same geometrical truths. (287-88) 
  15. Kant understands "nature" as the existence of things, so far as it is 
  determined according to universal laws. Nature is knowable a posteriori, so 
  Kant cannot mean by nature "what things are in themselves." (294) 
  16. He says "we possess a pure natural science . . . a priori . . . " ; it 
  consists of propositions regarding nature independent of any experience of 
  nature whatsoever and therefore independent of particular sensory observation. 
  Its laws include: "substance is permanent" and "every event is determined by a 
  cause according to constant laws." (295) 
  17. Kant distinguishes judgments of perception (JP), judgments that are valid 
  to me because they correspond to how things are connected in my perception, 
  from judgments of experience (JE), which result when JP's are transformed: 
  This happens when JP's are be subsumed under the law that, whenever an event 
  is observed, it is always related to some antecedent, which it follows 
  according to a universal rule. In other words, JE's are formed when to the JP 
  certain special concepts are added, e.g., that of the universal cause-effect 
  connection. (298ff.) 
  Example: JP: when [what seems to be] the sun [apparently] shines on [what 
  seems to be] the stone, it [apparently] grows warm. JE: The sun's shining on 
  the stone causes it to grow warm. 
  18. The objectively valid character of the JE signifies its necessary 
  universal validity, i.e., its objective validity for all subjects constituted 
  as we are. (300-301) 
  19. Without the imposition of concepts of the understanding all our 
  objectively valid synthetic judgments would be impossible. (301) 
  20. Kant claims he has derived a complete list of the pure a priori concepts 
  of the understanding, without which experience would not be possible. (302) 
  21. He works from a list of the general attributes of judgments and applies 
  them to the forms of intuition that create space and time. Causality is the 
  reflection of the hypothetical judgment (the conditional, or if-then 
  proposition) as applied to space and time. 
  22. Experience consists of intuitions, which belong to sensibility, and 
  judgments, which are entirely the work of the understanding. (304) 
  23. "The pure concepts of the understanding" are those under which all 
  perceptions must first be subsumed before they can serve for judgments of 
  experience, in which the synthetic unity of the perceptions is represented as 
  necessarily and universally valid. (305-306) 
  24. The question "How is a pure natural science possible?" is solved: The 
  categories, which reflect the table of judgments, give a complete and 
  necessary system for our a priori understanding of nature. (306) 
  25. We can now speak objectively of substance and cause-effect. We must think 
  of objects within experience as subsumed under categories of substance and 
  cause-effect, because without them we do not have coherent experience. These 
  features of objects of experience are universally valid because all human 
  subjects are so constituted as to impose them upon our intuitions. (Sections 
  25, 27) 
  26. We must not expect that these categories pertain to things in themselves; 
  rather they pertain only to objects of experience constituted by the union of 
  our intuitions and the categories. 
  27. We have discovered the definite bounds within which the concepts of 
  substance, cause-effect, etc. legitimately apply. Application beyond these 
  bounds (i.e., beyond experience) leads to what he calls transcendent illusion 
  (313-14) 
  28. Phenomena are "things of sense, or appearances." Phenomena can be known, 
  i.e., subsumed under the a priori concepts of understanding. Noumena are 
  "things of the understanding, which make up an intelligible world." (314) 
  29. About noumena, we neither know nor can know anything determinate whatever. 
  (314) 
  30. The understanding "transgress[es] with its otherwise legitimate concepts 
  the bounds of their use" when the mind goes beyond experience to explore a 
  much more extensive realm filled with pure noumena. 
  31. Transcendental philosophy can answer its highest question: How is nature 
  possible? It does so by answering two related questions: 
  32. The first "How is nature possible in general in the material sense?" is 
  answered thus: by means of the constitution of our sensibility (318) 
  33. The second "How is nature possible in the formal sense, as the totality of 
  rules under which all appearances must come in order to be thought as 
  connected in an experience?" is answered thus: by means of the constitution of 
  our understanding, according to which all the representations of sensibility 
  (percepts) are necessarily referred to a consciousness, and by the peculiar 
  way in which we think (the a priori concepts). (318) 
  34. Other than concepts of nature, metaphysics has to do with pure concepts of 
  reason, which can never be given in any possible experience whatsoever. 
  (328ff.) 
  35. This activity of reason arises when reason broods over the concepts of 
  understanding, without applying them to empirical appearances. 
  36. These pure concepts pertain to "transcendent" things: K. mean by 
  "transcendent" what goes beyond every possible experience. "Ideas [of pure 
  reason]" are necessary concepts whose objects cannot be given in any 
  experience. (328) 
  37. The ideas are distinct from the categories because the latter can be 
  discovered in experience (because we contribute them to it) and so confirmed 
  in experience. 
  38. Psychological idea refers to the absolute subject of particular 
  experiences projected beyond the presupposition of experience, i.e., life; 
  that is, the psychological idea is that of the immortal soul. (333ff.) 
  39. Kant denies that the immortality of the soul can be proved. Permanence is 
  a feature of substance, and this is something we know. But we know this only 
  within experience because we contribute this notion a priori to appearances in 
  order to constitute experience. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul 
  applies the category beyond experience to the subject as a noumenon. We have 
  no knowledge of this. (334-35) 
  40. The cosmological ideas are (1) whether or not the universe is infinite 
  with respect to space and time; (2) whether or not material things are 
  infinitely divisible; (3) whether or not there are "causes through freedom"; 
  and (4) whether or not there is a necessary being in the series of causes. 
  (338-39) 
  41. A theological idea is the idea of "a most perfect first being," i.e., God. 
  (348) 
  42. According to Kant, there is a position more absurd than claiming to know 
  something about noumena: that is to deny the existence of things in themselves 
  and declaring our [human] experience to be the only possible way of knowing 
  things. (350-51) 
  43. We are not at liberty to abstain from inquiring into what things in 
  themselves may be, even though we cannot obtain a definite notion of what 
  things in themselves are. (351) 
  44. We "think an immaterial being, a world of understanding and a Supreme 
  Being" even though we can never know them as they are in themselves because in 
  them only, as things in themselves, does reason find completion and 
  satisfaction. (354-55) 